>> Sreenivasan: ON THIS EDITION
FOR SATURDAY, MAY 6: THE
CAMPAIGN OF FRANCE'S LEADING
PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATE IS HACKED
AND THOUSANDS OF DOCUMENTS ARE
POSTED ONLINE; AND IN OUR
SIGNATURE SEGMENT, WHICH SIDE
WILL WIN THE YOUTH VOTE IN
FRANCE?
ALSO, THE POLITICS OF HEALTH
CARE REFORM AND WHAT COULD BE
COMING UP.
NEXT ON PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS AT
LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
HARI SREENIVASAN.
>> Sreenivasan: GOOD EVENING,
AND THANKS FOR JOINING US.
BEFORE PUBLIC CAMPAIGNING IN
FRANCE'S PRESIDENTIAL ELECTION
ENDED AT MIDNIGHT, THE HIGH-
STAKES CONTEST BETWEEN CENTRIST
EMMANUEL MACRON AND FAR-RIGHT
CANDIDATE MARINE LE PEN SUFFERED
A KIND OF DISRUPTION FAMILIAR TO
AMERICANS: THE FRONTRUNNER WAS
HACKED.
WHILE FRANCE ITSELF VOTES
TOMORROW, VOTING IS ALREADY
UNDER WAY IN FRENCH TERRITORIES
OVERSEAS AND AMONG FRENCH
CITIZENS LIVING ABROAD,
INCLUDING 120,000 HERE IN THE
UNITED STATES.
JUST BEFORE THOSE FIRST VOTERS
WENT TO THE POLLS TODAY, MACRON
CONFIRMED HE'D BEEN TARGETED BY
A "MASSIVE HACKING ATTACK" AFTER
THOUSANDS OF CAMPAIGN EMAILS AND
FINANCIAL RECORDS WERE POSTED
ONLINE.
MACRON CONDEMNED THE HACKERS FOR
"SEEDING DOUBT AND
DISINFORMATION."
HIS CAMPAIGN SAID SOME DOCUMENTS
WERE AUTHENTIC, BUT THE POSTINGS
INCLUDED MANY FAKES.
FRANCE'S ELECTION COMMISSION
ASKED FRENCH MEDIA AND CITIZENS
NOT TO REPUBLISH OR SHARE THE
HACKED CONTENT AND RISK
DISTORTING THE VOTE.
NO ONE HAS CLAIMED
RESPONSIBILITY FOR THE HACK.
FOR MORE ON THIS DEVELOPING
STORY, I AM JOINED BY SKYPE BY
REUTERS REPORTER ERIC AUCHARD,
WHO'S IN BERLIN.
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
FIRST OF ALL, WHAT WERE
DOCUMENTS THAT WERE REVEALED ON
THE INTERNET YESTERDAY?
>> WELL, THERE'S A WHOLE TROVE
OF WHAT PURPORT TO BE THE
E-MAILS OF VARIOUS CAMPAIGN
MEMBERS OF MACRON'S CAMPAIGN.
THERE'S QUESTIONS ABOUT WHETHER
ALL OF THEM ARE THE REAL THING
OR WHETHER THERE HAVE BEEN SOME
FAKE E-MAILS ADDED IN TO KIND OF
EMBARRASS THE CAMPAIGN.
IT APPEARS TO BE E-MAILS FROM AT
LEAST FOUR MEMBERS OF THE MACRON
CAMPAIGN, SENIOR ADVISERS,
SPEECH WRITERS, ET CETERA.
>> Sreenivasan: PUT THIS IN
PERSPECTIVE.
IN THE LAST COUPLE DAYS, THE
CANDIDATES AREN'T ALLOWED TO
CAMPAIGN.
>> THE DOCUMENTS WERE DROPPED
JUST HOURS BEFORE ALL THE
CAMPAIGNS, THE MEDIA ARE
RESTRICTED FROM SAYING ANYTHING
FOR 24 HOURS BEFORE THE ELECTION
BEGINS.
>> Sreenivasan: IS THERE
LIKELY TO BE AN IMPACT?
WHAT DO THE POLLS SAY?
THERE ARE LOTS OF UNDECIDED
VOTERS WHO COULD HAVE BEEN
INFLUENCED BY THIS INFORMATION.
>> THE PROBLEM IS THIS IS A
RUN-OFF.
THE TWO CANDIDATES THAT ARE IN
THE RUN-OFF ATTRACT A TOTAL OF
AROUND 45%, CERTAINLY UNDER 50%
OF THE TOTAL VOTE.
SO A LOT OF PEOPLE ARE HAVING TO
CONSIDER SECOND CHOICES.
SO THERE IS THE POSSIBILITY OF
PEOPLE CHANGING THEIR MINDS LATE
IN THE GAME.
>> Sreenivasan: ERIC, IS THERE
CONCERN IN GERMANY AND OTHER
PARTS OF EUROPE THAT HAVE
ELECTIONS AND VOTES COMING UP
ABOUT THIS TYPE OF HACKING
INFLUENCING THE OUTCOME?
>> MANY PARTIES WERE VERY
CONCERNED ABOUT THIS.
THERE'S BEEN MORE SIGNS OF IT,
REPORTS OF ATTACKS ON THINK
TANKS CONNECTED TO THE TWO TOP
GERMAN PARTIES, THE TDU AND THE
STD.
THAT FOLLOWS A SERIES OF ATTACKS
AGAINST THE GERMAN PARLIAMENT
AND THE MAIN POLITICAL PARTY OF
GERMAN CHANCELLOR ANGELA MERKEL
LAST YEAR.
>> Sreenivasan: HAS THE
COMPUTER SCIENCE OR THE COMPUTER
FORENSIC COMMUNITY THAT LOOKS AT
ALL OF THIS, I KNOW THEY HAVEN'T
GONE THROUGH THESE PARTICULAR
HACKS, BUT IN THE PREVIOUS ONE,
HAVE THEY STARTED TO POINT ANY
FINGERS OR FIGURE OUT THE
GENERAL DIRECTION OF WHERE THIS
IS COMING FROM?
>> SOME ARE VETERAN RESEARCHERS
THAT HAVE BEEN TRACKING THE
ACTIVITIES OF A PARTICULAR GROUP
CONNECTED TO THE RUSSIAN
GOVERNMENT.
THEY CONNECT TO THE RUSSIAN
MILITARY INTELLIGENCE
DIRECTORATE CALLED THE GRU.
THEIR FINGERPRINTS HAVE BEEN
FOUND BOTH IN ATTACKS ON THE
MACRON CAMPAIGN A FEW WEEKS AGO
AS WELL AS SOME OF THE ATTACKS
IN GERMANY.
THEY'VE BEEN... THIS IS A GROUP
THAT'S BEEN ACTIVE FOR MORE THAN
A DECADE AND HAS ATTACKED
MILITARIES, FOREIGN MINISTRIES,
POLITICAL PARTIES IN MANY
COUNTRIES, AND YET THIS IS
DIGITAL TECHNOLOGY.
IT IS VERY HARD TO PROVE.
SO ABSOLUTE CERTAINTY IS SIMPLY
NOT POSSIBLE HERE.
>> Sreenivasan: ALL RIGHT,
ERIC AUCHARD OF REUTERS JOINING
US LIVE VIA SKYPE FROM BERLIN.
THANK YOU VERY MUCH.
>> CERTAINLY.
>> Sreenivasan: THE ASSOCIATED
PRESS AND "WASHINGTON POST"
REPORTED TODAY THE TRUMP
TRANSITION TEAM HAD WARNED
MICHAEL FLYNN ABOUT HIS CONTACTS
WITH THE RUSSIAN AMBASSADOR TO
THE U.S. BEFORE FLYNN BECAME
PRESIDENT TRUMP'S NATIONAL
SECURITY ADVISER.
THE REPORTS SAY TRANSITION
OFFICIALS TOLD FLYNN LAST
NOVEMBER THAT HIS MEETINGS AND
CALLS WITH AMBASSADOR SERGEY
KISLYAK WERE MONITORED BY U.S.
INTELLIGENCE AGENCIES.
IN DECEMBER, FLYNN TALKED WITH
KISLYAK ABOUT THE SANCTIONS
AGAINST RUSSIA IMPOSED BY THE
OBAMA ADMINISTRATION FOR HACKING
HILLARY CLINTON'S EMAILS AND
MEDDLING IN THE ELECTION.
FLYNN RESIGNED IN FEBRUARY AFTER
HIS MISLEADING STATEMENTS ABOUT
THOSE COMMUNICATIONS WERE
EXPOSED.
A WHITE, SUBURBAN DALLAS POLICE
OFFICER CHARGED WITH MURDER IN
THE SHOOTING DEATH OF AN UNARMED
BLACK TEENAGER LAST SATURDAY
NIGHT HAS BEEN RELEASED ON
$300,000 BAIL.
37-YEAR-OLD ROY OLIVER, WHO WAS
ALSO FIRED THIS WEEK BY THE
POLICE DEPARTMENT IN BALCH
SPRINGS, TEXAS, ALLEGEDLY SHOT
HIS RIFLE INTO A CAR CARRYING
15-YEAR-OLD JORDAN EDWARDS, HIS
TWO BROTHERS AND TWO OTHER TEENS
AS THEY WERE LEAVING A HOUSE
PARTY.
JORDAN EDWARDS WAS KILLED, AND
FUNERAL SERVICES WERE HELD FOR
HIM TODAY.
OLIVER INITIALLY CLAIMED THE CAR
HAD BEEN BACKING UP TOWARD HIM
AND OTHER OFFICERS, BUT THE
POLICE DEPARTMENT NOW SAYS BODY
CAMERA VIDEO REVEALS THE CAR WAS
DRIVING AWAY WHEN OLIVER FIRED.
IOWA'S NEW LAW RESTRICTING
ABORTIONS IS ON HOLD.
THE LAW REQUIRES WOMEN SEEKING A
LEGAL ABORTION TO WAIT 72 HOURS
AFTER THEIR FIRST APPOINTMENT
ABOUT UNDERGOING THE PROCEDURE.
HOURS AFTER REPUBLICAN GOVERNOR
TERRY BRANSTAD SIGNED THE LAW
YESTERDAY, IOWA'S STATE SUPREME
COURT ISSUED A TEMPORARY
INJUNCTION BLOCKING IT.
PLANNED PARENTHOOD, THE STATE'S
LARGEST ABORTION PROVIDER, AND
THE A.C.L.U. SOUGHT THE
INJUNCTION, SAYING THE LAW IS
UNCONSTITUTIONAL.
IOWA COULD BECOME THE SIXTH
STATE TO REQUIRE A 72-HOUR
WAITING PERIOD.
22 OTHER STATES REQUIRE SHORTER
WAITING PERIODS, USUALLY FOR 24
HOURS.
>> Sreenivasan: RETURNING TO
FRANCE, THE TWO CANDIDATES IN
TOMORROW'S PRESIDENTIAL ELECTION
RUNOFF OFFER STARKLY DIFFERENT
PLANS FOR THEIR COUNTRY.
CENTRIST EMMANUEL MACRON, WHO'S
AHEAD IN THE POLLS, WOULD BECOME
FRANCE'S YOUNGEST PRESIDENT EVER
AT 39 YEARS OLD.
HE'S PRO-EUROPEAN UNION AND
SUPPORTS IMMIGRATION.
THE OTHER CANDIDATE, FAR RIGHT
NATIONALIST MARINE LE PEN, WOULD
BE THE COUNTRY'S FIRST FEMALE
PRESIDENT.
SHE WANTS FRANCE TO PULL OUT OF
THE E.U. AND TO CURB
IMMIGRATION.
IN TONIGHT'S SIGNATURE SEGMENT,
WE LOOK AT HOW A KEY DEMOGRAPHIC
GROUP IS CHOOSING SIDES: YOUNG
VOTERS.
THROUGHOUT THE CAMPAIGN, LE PEN
HAS BEEN BUOYED BY AN ENERGETIC
YOUTH VOTE, BUT, AS SPECIAL
CORRESPONDENT CHRISTOPHER
LIVESAY REPORTS, MACRON MAY HAVE
THE UPPER HAND.
>> Reporter: AS FRANCE WENT TO
THE POLLS TWO WEEKS AGO TO
DECIDE WHICH OF 11 CANDIDATES
WOULD MAKE THE PRESIDENTIAL
ELECTION RUNOFF, WE WATCHED THE
RETURNS AT AN ELECTION PARTY
HOSTED BY ERIC BARBOSA.
HE'S THE 20-YEAR-OLD PRESIDENT
OF THE PARIS CHAPTER OF THE
YOUTH WING OF MARINE LE PEN'S
PARTY, THE NATIONAL FRONT--LE
FRONT NATIONAL,IN FRENCH.
LE PEN'S SECOND PLACE FINISH
THAT NIGHT, QUALIFYING HER FOR
THE FINAL ROUND, PROPELLED THE
ONCE FRINGE PARTY INTO THE
MAINSTREAM.
>> SHE'S A GREAT WOMAN.
AND EVERYBODY IS LIKE, "WE ARE
GOING TO WIN."
>> Reporter: BARBOSA, A PART-
TIME BAKER AND FULL-TIME PARTY
VOLUNTEER, SAYS LE PEN'S
POPULISM AND PATRIOTISM INSPIRE
HIM.
WHAT IS HER VISION FOR YOUNG
PEOPLE IN THE FRONT NATIONAL?
>> BE PROUD, BE STRONG, BE
READY.
>> Reporter: BE READY?
>> YES, BECAUSE WE ARE THE
FUTURE FOR FRANCE.
>> I AM QUITE HAPPY.
>> Reporter: EURYANTHE MERCIER,
A 22-YEAR-OLD COLLEGE STUDENT,
JOINED THE PARTY THREE YEARS AGO
AND VOLUNTEERED FOR LE PEN'S
CAMPAIGN.
>> I LIKE HER PERSONALITY, AND I
TRUST HER SO.
I DON'T TRUST A LOT OF
POLITICIANS.
>> Reporter: MANON BOUQUIN IS
SECRETARY GENERAL OF A NATIONAL
PRO-LE PEN STUDENT GROUP.
>> (translated): WE DID MANAGE
THE FEAT OF MAKING IT TO THE
SECOND ROUND.
THREE YEARS AGO, NOBODY WOULD
HAVE BELIEVED IT.
AND WE THINK THERE'S A NEW WORLD
THAT CAN EMERGE, AND THE OLD
WORLD CAN COLLAPSE.
>> Reporter: THE YOUTH VOTE IS
AN IMPORTANT SOURCE OF STRENGTH
FOR THE NATIONAL FRONT, WHICH
SAYS ITS MEMBERSHIP AMONG 18-
YEAR-OLDS TO 25-YEAR-OLDS HAS
MORE THAN TRIPLED IN THE PAST
FIVE YEARS.
>> MADAME PRESIDENT!
(CHEERS AND APPLAUSE)
>> Reporter: A POLL OF FRANCE'S
YOUNGEST VOTERS BEFORE THE FIRST
ROUND FOUND A MAJORITY WERE
ANTI-ESTABLISHMENT, SUPPORTING
EITHER LE PEN OR THE LEFT-WING
POPULIST, JEAN-LUC MELENCHON.
CENTRIST EMMANUEL MACRON, LE
PEN'S OPPONENT IN THE RUNOFF,
WAS THIRD CHOICE DESPITE BEING
THE ONLY CANDIDATE UNDER 40.
BUT NOT LONG AGO, LE PEN WAS
CONSIDERED SO CONTROVERSIAL, FEW
WOULD ADMIT TO SUPPORTING HER.
>> WHY WHEN YOU ARE FRENCH, WHY
WHEN YOU ARE 20, YOU WANT TO GO
TO THE FRONT NATIONAL?
WHY?
>> Reporter: JOURNALIST
CHARLOTTE ROTMAN SPENT 18 MONTHS
TRAVELING THE COUNTRY AND
GETTING TO KNOW YOUNG LE PEN
ACTIVISTS FOR HER BOOK "20 YEARS
OLD AND AT THE FRONT."
>> SHE KNOWS HOW TO WELCOME
THEM, THE YOUNG PEOPLE.
ALSO, WHEN YOU ARE 20 AND WHEN
SOMEBODY TRUSTS YOU, I DON'T
KNOW IN THE UNITED STATES, BUT
IN FRANCE, IT'S VERY RARE.
AND WHEN THE FRONT NATIONAL
SAYS, "OKAY, YOU ARE 22, BUT YOU
ARE GOING TO BE THE HEAD OF THIS
LIST FOR THIS NEXT ELECTION,"
THEY FEEL REALLY LIKE...
>> Reporter: LIKE THEY ARE
APPRECIATED.
>> YES, REALLY.
>> Reporter: IN FACT, THE PARTY
HAS ASKED BOUQUIN, WHO IS JUST
24, TO RUN FOR A PARIS SEAT IN
PARLIAMENT NEXT MONTH.
>> (translated): I WAS GIVEN
NEW RESPONSIBILITIES.
THESE WERE OFFERED TO ME.
I'VE NEVER ASKED FOR ANYTHING.
I WAS HAPPY THE PARTY WAS
PLACING THEIR TRUST IN ME, FOR
THEM TO THINK OF ME AS SOMEONE
REASONABLE AND READY TO TAKE ON
THIS ROLE.
IT MADE ME QUITE PROUD.
>> Reporter: AND YOU GO THROUGH
THESE POINTS WITH PEOPLE ON THE
STREET?
ON ISSUES, BOUQUIN SAYS SHE SEES
EYE TO EYE WITH LE PEN OVER
CONCERNS ABOUT RADICAL ISLAM.
BUT BOUQUIN AND THE OTHER YOUNG
LE PEN SUPPORTERS WE MET SAY
WHAT MATTERS MOST IN THIS
ELECTION IS FRANCE'S STAGNATING
ECONOMY, WITH 10% UNEMPLOYMENT
THAT'S APPROACHING 26% AMONG
PEOPLE UNDER 25.
>> YOUNG PEOPLE HAVE A LOT OF
HOPE.
FRANCE IS NOT GOING WELL, AND
THE YOUNG PEOPLE SEE IT.
>> Reporter: THEY BLAME
GLOBALIZATION AND SHARE LE PEN'S
CALL FOR A REFERENDUM FOR FRANCE
TO LEAVE THE EUROPEAN UNION,
LIKE BRITAIN VOTED TO DO LAST
YEAR.
THEY WANT FRANCE TO TIGHTEN THE
BORDERS, NOW OPEN IN ACCORDANCE
WITH E.U. RULES, AND HAVE FRANCE
REVERT FROM THE EURO TO THE
FRANC.
THEY ALSO WANT THIS FAMILIAR
SIGHT SEEN ALL OVER PARIS, THE
FRENCH FLAG ALONGSIDE THE MULTI-
STARRED E.U. FLAG, TO BE A THING
OF THE PAST.
AREN'T THERE ANY BENEFITS OF
BEING IN THE EUROPEAN UNION THAT
YOU ARE WORRIED ABOUT LOSING?
WHAT ABOUT FREEDOM TO TRAVEL?
>> BEFORE THE EUROPEAN UNION,
YOU CAN GO WHERE YOU WANT.
A LOT OF PEOPLE SAY, OH, IT
TAKES A LOT OF TIME TO THE
BORDER.
OKAY, ONE MINUTE MORE.
ONE MINUTE!
>> (translated): NOT TO CLOSE
THE BORDERS, OF COURSE, BUT TO
REGULATE THEM.
TO BE ABLE TO MANAGE OUR
CURRENCY, DEVALUE IT IF WE WANT
TO.
AND TO HAVE WEAPONS AGAINST
GLOBALIZATION.
>> Reporter: LE PEN SAYS
RESTRICTING IMMIGRATION WILL
PROTECT FRANCE FROM TERRORISM,
CHEAP FOREIGN LABOR AND SAVE
FRENCH CULTURE ITSELF.
>> I'M AGAINST MASSIVE
IMMIGRATION, OF COURSE.
AND ACTUALLY, WE'VE SEEN SOME
PARTS IN FRANCE-- AND SOME PARTS
CLOSE TO PARIS, ESPECIALLY--
WHERE PEOPLE DON'T SPEAK ANYMORE
FRENCH TOGETHER.
THEY DON'T CELEBRATE FRENCH
NATIONAL DAYS.
SO, THEY DON'T WANT TO BE
FRENCH.
AND WHEN THEY GO TO A COUNTRY
AND THEY DON'T WANT TO BE A
MEMBER OF THE FRENCH COMMUNITY,
I THINK IT'S A PROBLEM.
>> Reporter: SUPPORT FOR LE PEN
AMONG YOUNG VOTERS IS NOT ONLY
ABOUT POLICY, ACCORDING TO
AUTHOR CHARLOTTE ROTMAN.
SHE SAYS THE MOVEMENT'S APPEAL
IS ALSO PERSONAL.
>> IT'S LIKE YOU HAVE A NEW
FAMILY.
IT'S US.
IT'S THE FRONT NATIONAL.
THE YOUNG SUPPORTERS I'VE BEEN
TALKING TO, THEY ARE DESCRIBING
SOMETHING THAT LOOKS LIKE A
FAMILY FOR THEM.
>> Reporter: HAVE YOU MET MARINE
LE PEN?
>> OH, YES, A FEW TIMES.
>> Reporter: WHAT WAS YOUR
IMPRESSION OF HER WHEN YOU MET
HER?
>> SHE'S A VERY WARM WOMAN.
SHE'S SMILING EVERY TIME, LIKE
THE MOTHER OF FRANCE.
LIKE, SHE WANTS TO PROTECT US,
AND THAT'S THE MESSAGE, I THINK.
>> Reporter: BUT HER POLITICAL
OPPONENTS CALL HER A DANGEROUS
RIGHT-WING EXTREMIST, AND
CERTAINLY THERE ARE THOSE ON THE
STREETS OF PARIS WHO AGREE.
RIGHT OUTSIDE THIS POLLING
STATION, THERE IS A PICTURE OF
MARINE LE PEN, AND, AS YOU CAN
SEE, SHE IS NOT VERY POPULAR
HERE IN PARIS.
THIS ONE HAS BEEN GRAFFITIED ON
TOP OF IT, CALLS HER A FASCIST.
THREE HOURS SOUTH OF PARIS, IN
THE TOWN OF LIMOGES, WE CAUGHT
UP WITH YOUNG PEOPLE WHO ARE
STRONGLY OPPOSED TO LE PEN.
THEY'RE BACKING MACRON, THE
FORMER ECONOMY MINISTER MAKING
HIS FIRST RUN FOR OFFICE.
A POLL OUT THIS WEEK SHOWED
MACRON WITH THE ADVANTAGE AMONG
VOTERS AGE 18-24, WITH 62%
SAYING THEY INTEND TO VOTE FOR
HIM AND 38% FOR LE PEN.
SUPPORTER RACHEL-FLORE PARDO
DISCUSSES THE HIGH UNEMPLOYMENT
RATE WITH THIS POTENTIAL VOTER.
>> EMMANUEL MACRON HAS A VERY
INTERESTING PROPOSAL ON THAT.
SO, I THINK IT IS VERY LIKELY
SHE WILL VOTE FOR MACRON.
I DON'T KNOW, NOT 100%.
BUT I THINK SEEING US HERE MAY
HAVE MADE A DIFFERENCE.
>> Reporter: SHE'S ONE OF FOUR
YOUNG PEOPLE WE MET, ALL IN
THEIR 20s, CAMPAIGNING IN A
CREATIVE WAY FOR MACRON.
>> I WAS EXPLAINING TO HIM THAT
IT'S NOT ABOUT CAPITALISM AND
BIG BANKS; IT'S MORE ABOUT
ENTREPRENEURS AND HELPING THEM
HIRE PEOPLE, BECAUSE, IN THE
END, THAT'S WHAT CREATES
EMPLOYMENT.
>> Reporter: THEY'RE ALL
TRAVELING IN A VAN NAMED "EN
MARCHE LE TOUR" AFTER MACRON'S
MOVEMENT, "ON THE MOVE."
SINCE FEBRUARY, THEY'VE DRIVEN
ALMOST 3,000 MILES AND TALKED TO
THOUSANDS OF PEOPLE IN MORE THAN
60 DIFFERENT CITIES.
>> IT'S A SMALL OFFICE.
>> Reporter: THEY SAY THEY FELT
COMPELLED TO TAKE THIS ROAD TRIP
TO UNDERSTAND WHAT THEY SEE AS A
FRIGHTENING TREND IN EUROPEAN
AND AMERICAN POLITICS.
>> WE WERE A BIT WORRIED BY ALL
THE POPULIST VOTES ALL AROUND
THE WORLD, AND EVEN MORE WORRIED
FOR FRANCE.
>> WITH BOTH THE BREXIT THEN
TRUMP'S ELECTION, THAT REALLY
SHOCKED ME.
>> AND SO, FOR THAT ELECTION IN
FRANCE, WE WANTED TO DO
SOMETHING BEFORE, TRY TO
UNDERSTAND WHY PEOPLE ARE
INTERESTED IN VOTING FOR A
POPULIST CANDIDATE.
AND THIS IS HOW WE GOT THE IDEA.
>> Reporter: THEY FOCUS ON THE
FRENCH COUNTRYSIDE, WHERE LE
PEN'S ANTI-E.U. AND ANTI-
GLOBALIZATION MESSAGE HAS STRUCK
A CHORD WITH STRUGGLING FARMERS
AND FACTORY WORKERS.
THEY SAY THEY'VE MET TWO TYPES
OF LE PEN SUPPORTERS, THE TRUE
BELIEVERS WHO GENERALLY BLAME
IMMIGRANTS FOR FRANCE'S
PROBLEMS, AND THOSE WHO ARE
PROTESTING POLITICS AS USUAL.
>> THEY TELL US, "I AM JUST
TIRED WITH THEM ALL.
I'M GOING TO VOTE FOR HER FOR A
CHANGE."
AND THOSE PEOPLE, WHEN WE CHAT
WITH THEM, THEY CAN REALIZE THAT
MARINE LE PEN IS NOT NECESSARILY
THE PERSON WHO OFFERS THEM A
SOLUTION.
WHAT SHE DOES WELL IS SPEAK
ABOUT THEIR PROBLEMS, BUT I
DON'T THINK ANY SOLUTION SHE
OFFERS IS REALISTIC.
AND SOMETIMES WE CAN ACTUALLY
CONVINCE THOSE PEOPLE OR AT
LEAST OPEN THEIR MIND AND MAKE
THEM DOUBT ABOUT IT.
>> Reporter: IN THE PAST TWO
WEEKS SINCE THE RUNOFF WAS SET,
THEY'VE TRIED TO PERSUADE PEOPLE
TO CONSIDER MACRON'S PRO-E.U.
MESSAGE AS THE BEST WAY TO
ENSURE PEACE AND PROSPERITY, AND
MOVE FORWARD ON ISSUES LIKE
CLIMATE CHANGE.
>> I DON'T THINK FRANCE ALONE
CAN BE, LIKE, THE LEADING
COUNTRY FOR THE ENVIRONMENT, BUT
EUROPE TOGETHER CAN.
AND THE SAME THING FOR DIPLOMACY
IN THE WORLD.
I DON'T THINK FRANCE MATTERS A
LOT, BUT I THINK EUROPE TOGETHER
MATTERS.
AND SO, THIS IS WHY I THINK THE
ELECTION IN FRANCE IS VERY
IMPORTANT FOR THE FUTURE OF
EUROPE, AND SO, IN A SENSE, FOR
THE FUTURE OF THE WORLD.
>> WE HAVE TWO VISIONS OF FRANCE
THAT ARE CONFRONTING EACH OTHER.
IT'S THE LE PEN AND THE MACRON
VISION.
IT'S A NATIONALIST VERSUS A MORE
MODERN AND OPEN EUROPEAN VISION.
IT'S A VISION OF FRANCE THAT IS
SCARED OF THE FUTURE AND THAT IS
SCARED OF EUROPE AND OF THE
WORLD VERSUS ONE THAT IS HOPEFUL
ABOUT THE OPPORTUNITIES THAT
COME WITH EUROPE AND WITH
MODERNITY.
SO, THIS IS WHAT IT'S ABOUT.
>> Sreenivasan: THIS MURAL
PROJECT IS ENCOURAGING KIDS TO
LEARN THE ALPHABET FROM THEIR
EVERYDAY SURROUNDINGS.
READ MORE AT
www.pbs.org/newshour.
THE DEBATE OVER REPLACING THE
SEVEN-YEAR-OLD AFFORDABLE CARE
ACT IS NOW IN THE HANDS OF THE
UNITED STATES SENATE.
THIS FOLLOWS THURSDAY'S PASSAGE
OF A REVAMPED BILL FROM THE
HOUSE THAT WOULD END THE
EMPLOYER MANDATE TO PROVIDE
INSURANCE AND THE INDIVIDUAL
MANDATE TO HAVE IT.
THE REPUBLICAN PLAN WOULD
REPLACE GOVERNMENT SUBSIDIES TO
BUY HEALTH INSURANCE WITH TAX
CREDITS.
AMONG OTHER THINGS, IT WOULD
ALLOW INSURANCE COMPANIES TO
CHARGE HIGHER PREMIUMS FOR
ELDERLY AMERICANS AND PEOPLE
WITH PRE-EXISTING CONDITIONS
WHILE IT WOULD LIMIT MEDICAID
COVERAGE FOR LOW INCOME
AMERICANS.
THE NONPARTISAN CONGRESSIONAL
BUDGET OFFICE HAS YET TO OFFER
ITS ANALYSIS, BUT THE C.B.O.
PREDICTED THE PREVIOUS VERSION
OF THE HOUSE BILL COULD KNOCK 24
MILLION AMERICANS UNINSURED IN
THE NEXT FEW YEARS.
FOR MORE ON THIS DEBATE, I'M
JOINED FROM SANTA BARBARA,
CALIFORNIA, BY NEWSHOUR WEEKEND
SPECIAL CORRESPONDENT JEFF
GREENFIELD.
IT'S HARD TO GET INTO TOO
MUCH OF A POLICY DISCUSSION,
BECAUSE WE KNOW THAT THIS IS
GOING TO CHANGE IN SOME
SIGNIFICANT FORM BY THE TIME IT
GETS TO THE SENATE, BUT LET'S
TALK A LITTLE BIT ABOUT THE
POLITICS OF THIS HERE.
WHAT ARE THE RISKS FOR THE
REPUBLICANS WHO DECIDED TO GET
THIS THROUGH THE HOUSE?
>> WELL, YOU CAN SEE THE RISKS
THAT HAVE ALREADY EMERGED.
IF YOU LOOK AT THE PEOPLE WHO
TAKE THE POLITICAL TEMPERATURE,
THE "COOK POLITICAL REPORT,"
WHICH IS A NON-PARTISAN SITE,
HAS JUST IN THE DAY OR TWO SINCE
THAT BILL PASSED MOVED 20 SEATS
IN THE HOUSE TOWARD THE
DEMOCRATS.
THE DEMOCRATIC CONGRESSIONAL
CAMPAIGN COMMITTEE, GRANTED
THAT'S NOT NON-PARTISAN, SAYS
THEY NOW CONTEND TO CONTEST NOT
45 OR 50 SEATS BUT WELL OVER
100.
ONE THING I WOULD DEFINITELY
KEEP WATCHING IS WHETHER OR NOT
FORMIDABLE DEMOCRATIC CONTENDERS
AGREE TO CHALLENGE ENTRENCHED
REPUBLICAN INCUMBENTS AS THE
MID-TERMS GET NEARER.
THAT WOULD BE A REAL SIGN THAT
DEMOCRATS THINK THEY'VE GOT THE
REPUBLICANS BECAUSE OF HEALTH
CARE IN A VULNERABLE POSITION.
>> Sreenivasan: WHAT HAPPENS
IN THE SENATE GOING FORWARD?
WHAT KIND OF RESISTANCE WILL
THERE BE TO SOME OF THE
UNDERPINNINGS IN THIS
LEGISLATION NOW IN
>> LIKE THEY SAY IN THE
BALLPARK, WE CAN'T TELL THE
PLAYERS WITHOUT A SCORECARD.
THIS PASSED THE HOUSE BECAUSE
THE HARD RIGHT FREEDOM CAUCUS
GOT SIGNIFICANT CONCESSIONS,
WHICH, IN TURN, REALLY WORRIED
MODERATES, AND IN THE SENATE,
THERE ARE ENOUGH MODERATE
REPUBLICANS TO DERAIL THIS.
THE REPUBLICANS IN THE SENATE
HAVE ALREADY SAID TO THE HOUSE,
LOOK, THANK YOU VERY MUCH.
WE'RE GOING TO WRITE OUR OWN
BILL.
AND IN ANSWER TO THIS, THE FACT
THAT IN MANY STATES REPUBLICAN
GOVERNORS HAVE EXPANDED
MEDICAID, AND PART OF THIS BILL,
AT LEAST THE HOUSE VERSION,
WOULD SEVERELY LIMIT HOW MUCH IS
AVAILABLE TO THESE STATES TO
KEEP EXPANDING OR EVEN KEEP
MEDICAID WHERE IT IS.
SO THESE REPUBLICAN GOVERNORS
MAY BE PUTTING PRESSURE ON
REPUBLICAN SENATORS TO FIX WHAT
THE HOUSE DID.
IT'S A BYZANTINE PICTURE.
>> Sreenivasan: LET'S TALK
ABOUT OBAMACARE.
A LOT OF PEOPLE POINT OUT THAT
WAS ALONG PARTY LINES.
THAT WAS A DIFFERENT MOVE FOR
THE COUNTRY.
ARE THE CONSEQUENCES GOING TO BE
SIMILAR IN THIS CASE?
>> THERE IS NO QUESTION WHEN
OBAMACARE FINALLY GOT THROUGH --
I BELIEVE THE PRESIDENT SIGNED
THE BILL IN MARCH 2010 -- IT WAS
VERY UNPOPULAR.
THE BENEFITS DIDN'T BEGIN TO
KICK IN FOR A COUPLE MORE YEARS,
SO BY THE TIME THE MID-TERMS
HAPPENED IN 2010, THE
UNPOPULARITY OF THAT BILL, WHICH
WAS NOT MITIGATED BY ANY
BENEFITS BY THEN, PRODUCED A
62-SEAT LOSS IN THE HOUSE FOR
THE DEMOCRATS.
IF YOU MEASURE PUBLIC OPINION
POLLS, TRUMPCARE, IF THAT'S WHAT
WE WANT THE CALL THIS, IS EVEN
MORE UNPOPULAR NOW THAN
OBAMACARE WAS THEN.
>> Sreenivasan: ONE OF THE
THINGS THAT'S A LITTLE DIFFERENT
IS OBAMACARE PASSED IN THE SAME
YEAR AS AN ELECTION.
WE HAVE QUITE A BIT OF TIME
BETWEEN NOW AND NOVEMBER OF
2018.
THIS IS JUST ONE PIECE OF
LEGISLATION, ONE PART OF THE
HISTORY.
WILL VOTERS REMEMBER THIS WHEN
THEY GO TO THE POLLS?
>> IF WE'VE LEARNED ANYTHING
FROM THE LAST ELECTION IS TRYING
TO PROJECT A YEAR AND A HALF OUT
WAS A HUGE ERROR.
BUT ONE THING WE SHOULD
REMEMBER, OR MAYBE TWO THINGS,
BUT ONE IS ANY ATTEMPT TO
RADICALLY CHANGE HEALTH CARE
COMES WITH A POLITICAL COST.
LOOK BACK TO 1993 AND '94 WHEN
HILLARY CLINTON WAS IN CHARGE OF
DEVELOPING BILL CLINTON'S HEALTH
CARE PLAN.
THAT CRASHED AND BURNS, NEVER
EVEN GOT TO A VOTE, AND THE
DEMOCRATS LOST BOTH THE HOUSE
AND THE SENATE THAT YEAR.
CONSERVATIVES HAVE ALWAYS
WORRIED ABOUT ENTITLEMENTS.
BUT ONCE THEY ARE IN PLACE, THE
PUBLIC DOESN'T WANT TO GIVE THEM
UP.
AND IT'S INTERESTING.
NOW AS OBAMACARE IS THREATENED
WITH REPEAL AND REPLACE, IT'S
MORE POPULAR THAN IT EVER HAS
BEEN.
AND I THINK FOR A LOT OF
CONSERVATIVES, THEIR CONCERN,
ONCE YOU PASS ENTITLEMENT, YOU
CAN'T UNDO IT, IS GOING TO BE
TESTED ASSUMING THE REPUBLICANS
EVER GET A BILL BETWEEN THE
HOUSE AND THE SENATE AND THE
PRESIDENT THAT IS ENACTED INTO
LAW.
>> Sreenivasan: JEFF
GREENEFIELD, THANKS SO MUCH.
>> THANK YOU.
>>THIS IS PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND,
SATURDAY.
>> Sreenivasan: IN THE EAST
AFRICAN NATION OF TANZANIA, AT
LEAST 35 PEOPLE, ALMOST ALL OF
THEM CHILDREN, DIED TODAY IN A
SCHOOL BUS ACCIDENT.
ALL BUT THREE OF THE FATALITIES
WERE 12-YEAR-OLD AND 13-YEAR-OLD
STUDENTS ON THEIR WAY TO TAKE AN
EXAM.
TWO TEACHERS AND THE DRIVER ALSO
DIED.
POLICE SAY THE DRIVER HAD LOST
CONTROL OF THE BUS AS IT
DESCENDED A STEEP HILL IN THE
RAIN.
TANZANIA'S PRESIDENT CALLS THE
ACCIDENT A "NATIONAL TRAGEDY."
A DE-ESCALATION PLAN TOOK EFFECT
IN SYRIA TODAY, AND A HUMAN
RIGHTS MONITORING GROUP SAYS
FIGHTING HAS APPEARED TO EASE.
THE ARRANGEMENT BROKERED BY
RUSSIA, TURKEY AND IRAN CREATES
SAFE ZONES IN FOUR AREAS OF
SYRIA WHERE REBELS FIGHTING THE
REGIME OF PRESIDENT BASHAR AL-
ASSAD HAVE A LARGE PRESENCE.
THE U.S. SAYS IT IS "CAUTIOUS"
ABOUT THE SAFE ZONE DEAL
WORKING.
THE ASSAD GOVERNMENT SAYS IT
WILL ABIDE BY IT WHILE RESERVING
THE RIGHT TO FIGHT WHAT IT CALLS
"TERRORISTS" ACROSS SYRIA.
IN AFGHANISTAN, AFTER TWO DAYS
OF HEAVY FIGHTING, TALIBAN
MILITANTS HAVE SEIZED A DISTRICT
JUST WEST OF THE NORTHERN CITY
OF KUNDUZ, FORCING AFGHAN
SOLDIERS TO PULL BACK.
THE TERRITORY HAS SWITCHED HANDS
MULTIPLE TIMES IN THE PAST 18
MONTHS BETWEEN TALIBAN FORCES
AND GOVERNMENT TROOPS.
U.S. OFFICIALS ESTIMATE THE
GOVERNMENT CONTROLS ONLY 60% OF
AFGHANISTAN.
NEXT WEEK, THE PENTAGON IS
EXPECTED TO BRIEF PRESIDENT
TRUMP ON FUTURE AFGHAN STRATEGY
OPTIONS, INCLUDING DEPLOYING
MORE AMERICAN TROOPS.
U.S. MILITARY FORCES HAVE BEEN
IN THE COUNTRY FOR 16 YEARS
FOLLOWING 9/11.
THE PENTAGON HAS IDENTIFIED THE
U.S. NAVY SEAL COMMANDO KILLED
THIS WEEK FIGHTING AN AL QAEDA
AFFILIATE IN SOMALIA.
HE WAS SENIOR CHIEF PETTY
OFFICER KYLE MILLIKEN OF
FALMOUTH, MAINE.
OFFICIALS SAY MILLIKEN DIED
THURSDAY IN AN OPERATION WITH
SOMALI TROOPS AGAINST AL-SHABAB
MILITANTS WEST OF MOGADISHU.
MILLIKEN IS THE FIRST AMERICAN
SOLDIER TO DIE IN SOMALIA SINCE
1993.
HE WAS 38.
ON PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND SUNDAY,
HUNDREDS OF CAMBODIAN REFUGEES
WHO GREW UP IN AMERICA, DEPORTED
BECAUSE THEY COMMITTED A FELONY.
>> WE CHANGED OUR LIVES.
WE HAD FAMILIES.
THEN, KNOCK-KNOCK, YOU KNOW.
"YOU'VE GOT TO GO BECAUSE YOU'RE
NOT A CITIZEN."
>> Sreenivasan: FINALLY, THE
NIGERIAN GOVERNMENT SAYS THE
ISLAMIC EXTREMIST GROUP BOKO
HARAM HAS FREED 83 MORE
SCHOOLGIRLS IT KIDNAPPED TWO
YEARS AGO.
THE GIRLS WERE KIDNAPPED IN
APRIL 2013.
TODAY'S RELEASE IS THE LARGEST
GROUP THE MILITANTS HAVE
RELEASED, BUT MORE THAN 100 OF
THE GIRLS REMAIN IN CAPTIVITY.
THAT'S ALL FOR THIS EDITION OF
"PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND."
THANKS FOR WATCHING.
I'M HARI SREENIVASAN.
HAVE A GOOD NIGHT.